Hi from Tokyo Japan, and welcome to Jeremy’s
IT Lab. In this video we’re going to cover REST
API authentication. We’ve already covered the
basics of REST APIs, but Cisco recently added
authentication to the list of things you need
to know about REST for the CCNA exam. APIs give
access to an application and its data, so security
should always be a major concern when designing
and using APIs. In this video, we’ll examine
some common methods of REST API authentication.
But before we get started, let me take a minute
to shill my books, Acing the CCNA Exam volumes
1 and 2. These books are up to date, covering
everything you need for the latest version of
the exam. REST API authentication, for example,
is covered in chapter 23 of volume 2. I highly
recommend using books in combination with
a video course, and if you want my books,
you can get them at the links on the screen
now, or on Amazon. Now let’s get started.
So, what are we going to cover in this
video? First, I’ll introduce the concept
of REST API authentication in general,
including why it’s so important. Then,
for the rest of the video, we’ll cover
four common types of REST authentication:
basic authentication, bearer authentication,
API key authentication, and finally OAuth2.0.
We’ll outline how each of these methods works,
and their advantages and disadvantages. So,
that’s the plan for today. Now let’s
learn about REST API authentication.
Hopefully you already know this definition
from the security section of the course, but
authentication is the process of validating the
identity of a user or system to ensure legitimate
access to resources. In the case of an API, the
resource is the application and its data. In many
cases, these resources should be protected. But
without authentication, unauthorized users can
send API requests, potentially accessing sensitive
data or modifying the application. For example,
here we have an application and some data. The API
serves as an interface, allowing other apps to use
the application or to access its data. Without
authentication, if a malicious user sends an
API call, also called an API request, the API will
accept the request and provide the requested data.
It’s worth noting that some APIs are intentionally
open and don’t require authentication. These APIs
typically provide publicly available data
that doesn’t require security protection.
But for many APIs, that isn’t the case,
and security is a major concern. When the
malicious user makes the API call, the API
should authenticate the user, asking “who
are you?”. If the authentication process fails,
the request is denied and the user doesn’t get
access to the data. Implementing a reliable
authentication method like this is essential
for protecting applications and data that aren’t
meant to be publicly available. And in addition to
security concerns, many APIs track usage for
analytics and billing purposes. For example,
charging customers according to how much they use
the API is a common practice. A great example is
the ChatGPT API. Many AI applications use ChatGPT
behind the scenes, and OpenAI charges businesses
based on token usage. Basically, a token
is a chunk of text, either input or output,
and this means companies pay more as they send
larger or more frequent requests to the API.
So, to summarize the previous slide, when working
with REST APIs, authentication is crucial for
verifying a client’s identity and securing access
to resources. REST APIs use various types of
authentication to achieve this, and we’ll cover
some key ones in this video. These authentication
types are also called authentication methods,
or authentication schemes; those are the more
technical terms. In this video, we’re going to
cover four of them. The first method is basic
authentication. As the name suggests, this is the
simplest form of REST authentication. It sends a
username and password in every request, encoded
in Base64 format. Note that encoding is not the
same as encryption; I’ll explain that in the next
slide. Next, we have bearer authentication. This
method uses a token, called a bearer token,
included as an HTTP header in the request,
to verify the client’s identity. This method
is quite common in modern APIs; the client
first obtains a token and then includes it in
requests after that. Another common method is API
key authentication. This requires a unique key,
which is typically included as an HTTP header,
like the bearer token. The API key acts as a
unique identifier for the client, and is useful
for tracking usage. Finally, we have OAuth 2.0.
This is a more advanced and secure authentication
framework that grants access using access tokens.
OAuth 2.0 is widely used for delegated access
and third-party authentication. I’ll break down
what those terms mean when we cover OAuth 2.0 in
detail. But if you’ve ever seen the “log in with
google” option on a website, that’s OAuth2.0. Each
of these methods has its own advantages and
use cases. Now let’s look at them one by one.
We’ll start with basic authentication, which
authenticates using a username and password in
the HTTP headers of each API request. Before
we dive deeper into basic authentication,
let's first break down the structure of an HTTP
message so you can see where authentication fits
in. It begins with what’s called the start line,
which includes three pieces of information: The
HTTP method, which is POST in this case; the URL,
which is api/v1/acl/rules; and the HTTP version,
which is 2 in this case. The POST method
is typically used for a create operation;
think back to the CRUD operations (create, read,
update, delete) we covered in the previous video
on REST. So, this HTTP message is probably a
request to create something on the server. Next,
we have the headers. These provide metadata about
the request, such as authentication details,
content type, and information about the
client making the request. Often there
are several headers; there are four in this
case. The headers are followed by a blank line,
and then there is the message body, the actual
contents of the message. This is the HTTP message,
which would then be encapsulated in a TCP
segment to be sent over the network. This
message is using basic authentication;
can you find it? It’s this line right
here. It uses the “Authorization” header,
but the real purpose is to authenticate the
request. And then that authentication can
be used to provide proper authorization.
Now that we’ve identified where the basic
authentication occurs in the HTTP headers of
the API request, let’s look a bit deeper at basic
authentication. As I said, basic authentication
includes a username and password in the HTTP
headers. These credentials are encoded in Base64
format, but not encrypted. That’s an important
distinction. Base64 is an encoding scheme,
which is simply a way of representing data.
And unlike encryption, it is not secure and
can be easily decoded. So, although I’ve been
referring to HTTP, you really should be using
HTTPS with your REST APIs for security. HTTPS
is HTTP plus TLS, Transport Layer Security,
which provides robust encryption and security.
The username and password used for basic
authentication are sent in the format username
colon password, encoded in Base64. For example,
username jeremy and password ccna would be sent
as this string of characters. If you’re curious,
you can visit this URL, base64decode.org,
to encode and decode base64. So, let’s see
how basic authentication works in action.
On the right here we have the REST server,
with an API allowing access to its data. And
on the left we have a client app that wants
to access the data. It sends an API call,
including the “Authorization” header for
authentication. Notice the password is encoded
in Base64; that’s username jeremy and password
ccna. The authentication succeeds, so the server
grants the request and responds with the data. So,
it’s that simple: a username and password are
included with each request, and if they’re
correct, authentication succeeds. Now that
we’ve seen how basic authentication works,
let’s consider the advantages and disadvantages.
Honestly, the main advantage is that it’s simple
and easy to implement, just a username and
password. But since those credentials are sent
in every request, attackers could steal them if
the connection isn’t properly secured. But really,
that applies for any authentication method:
HTTPS is essential when communicating over
the modern Internet; you shouldn’t use regular
HTTP. But even if using HTTPS for encryption,
relying solely on a username and password
combination isn’t particularly secure. If an
attacker gets access to the credentials, whether
through social engineering or another attack,
they get access to the API. So that’s basic
authentication. Let’s move on to the next method.
Next, we’ll look at bearer authentication,
which is a form of token-based authentication,
and uses a token instead of a username
and password. In bearer authentication,
the client first obtains a token by authenticating
with an authorization server, often just called an
“auth server”. This is typically different from
the server actually hosting the resource the
client wants to access. Note that authenticating
with the auth server can be done using basic
authentication or another authentication method.
This step is separate from the actual API request
to the resource server. Then, after the client
gets the token, for each API request, the client
includes the token in the HTTP authorization
header like we saw before. For example,
it will look something like this: Authorization:
Bearer, and then the token. Let’s see how it
works. Notice I’m showing two servers now. One
is the auth server, which generates the token.
And then the resource server, which hosts whatever
resource the client wants to access. So, to begin,
the client requests a token from the auth server,
and if successful, the server grants the client
a token. Then, when the client sends an API call
to the resource server, it includes the token in
the call. And then the resource server responds,
either with the requested resource, or a message
indicating the server did what was requested. So,
that’s basically how bearer authentication works.
The term “bearer” means that anyone who possesses
the token can use it. This means that, if an
attacker steals the token, they can make requests,
API calls, as if they were the legitimate user.
This is clearly a security problem, so to
mitigate against this, tokens usually expire
after a set period of time. The expiration time
depends on the API’s security needs. Some tokens
expire in 15 minutes to reduce risk, while
others last weeks or months for convenience,
especially in low-security environments. Okay,
let’s summarize by considering some advantages
and disadvantages of bearer authentication. First
off, it’s more secure than basic authentication,
because there’s no need to transmit the same
username and password for every single API
call. The tokens that are used instead expire, so
a stolen token will only be temporarily valid. But
still, it’s worth mentioning as a disadvantage
that, if the token is stolen, the attacker can
still access the API until the token expires. And
since tokens need to be refreshed periodically,
it adds some extra complexity when implementing
bearer authentication, compared to basic
authentication. That’s not a problem for
network engineers, but for the programmers
who build these APIs it’s worth considering.
And finally, just like basic authentication,
it should only be used with HTTPS. If the token is
sent in cleartext, no encryption, it simply isn’t
secure; you need HTTPS when communicating over the
modern internet. While bearer tokens are commonly
used for user authentication in APIs, some APIs
use a simpler method, which we’ll cover next.
Next up is API key authentication, which uses a
static key issued by the API provider. The client
uses this key in each API call for authentication.
The main difference between a bearer token and a
key is that, unlike bearer tokens, the API key
is static. It doesn’t expire automatically,
so it remains valid until revoked. API keys
can be sent to the server in a few ways.
The recommended way is to include the key in the
HTTP Authorization header, as we saw in basic and
bearer authentication. But you can also include
the key in the URL, in the start line of the
HTTP request, by adding a parameter to the URL.
But this is not recommended for several reasons,
one being that since URLs are often logged
by web servers, proxies, and browsers,
API keys included in URLs can be exposed in logs,
making them vulnerable to attackers. And a third
option is to send the API key as a cookie, which
is sometimes used for browser-based APIs. But in
any case, the recommended method is to include
the key in the authorization header. Let’s
see what it looks like; it’s quite simple.
The client sends an API call to the server
hosting the resource it wants to access. And the
client includes the API key in the authorization
header of the HTTP message. Assuming the key was
valid, the server then sends its response. Okay,
now that we’ve seen how it works, let’s consider
a couple of advantages and disadvantages. One
advantage is that it’s easier to implement than
Bearer authentication. And API key authentication
is good for tracking usage. The API provider can
assign a unique key to each customer, and then
easily track each customer’s usage by tracking
the key used in each API call. Because of this,
API keys are often used in cloud services and
third-party APIs. If you’re wondering what a
third-party API is, think of a developer that
builds a chatbot app that uses ChatGPT. The end
users are the first party. The developer creating
the chatbot app is the second party. But instead
of generating responses itself, the app calls
OpenAI’s API to get responses from ChatGPT.
Since OpenAI is external to both the users and
the app developer, it’s the third party in this
interaction. Hopefully that makes sense! Now let’s
look at a couple of disadvantages. One problem is
that, if stolen, the key grants full access until
revoked. It doesn’t automatically expire. So,
API keys must be rotated manually to maintain
security, whereas the tokens used in bearer
authentication expire automatically. Okay
that’s all for API key authentication.
Finally, we move on to OAuth 2.0. It’s a secure
authentication framework that is widely used in
modern web applications. Its overall purpose is
different from the other methods we’ve looked at,
in that it provides access delegation,
granting third-party applications limited
access to resources on behalf of the resource’s
owner. The main benefit is that there is no need
to share the resource owner’s credentials with
the third party. For example, when you use ‘Log
in with Google’ on a website, the website
never sees your Google password. Instead,
Google confirms your identity and grants
access only to approved information. Let’s
look at some examples of OAuth2.0. The first is
what I just mentioned, logging in with google.
Many websites and apps offer the option to log
in using your Google account. The third party
website or app is granted access to some of your
Google account’s information, without actually
getting access to your account’s credentials.
Connecting apps to social media accounts is
another example. Many apps can be connected to
Instagram, Facebook, LinkedIn, etc. OAuth 2.0
lets these apps access your social media account
for specific tasks, like posting on your behalf,
without revealing your login credentials.
Calendar integration is one more example.
A third-party tool, like a scheduling app, can
be given access to your Google calendar to check
availability and schedule meetings. These are
all common examples of OAuth2.0. Now let’s
see how it actually works. There are four main
parties involved. First is the resource owner,
the account owner granting access to their data.
Using the Google calendar integration example,
this is the owner of the google account. Next
is the client app, the third-party application
requesting access to your Google data, like a
scheduling tool accessing your calendar. Then
there is the auth server. This server issues
access tokens, granting limited access to your
google account, after receiving user approval.
In this example, this is Google’s OAuth service.
Finally, there is the resource server, the
server that hosts the protected resource. In
this example, it’s the server hosting the Google
calendar data that the client app wants to access.
Now let’s see OAuth2.0 in action. The overall
process consists of six main steps. First,
the client app requests authorization
from the resource owner. In our example,
this could be a scheduling app requesting
access to your Google Calendar. Next,
the resource owner—which is you, the account
owner—grants authorization by logging into your
Google account and giving permission for the
scheduling app to access your calendar data.
Once permission is granted, the client app
exchanges this authorization grant for an
access token from the auth server—which in this
case, is Google’s OAuth service. The auth server
then issues an access token to the client app.
This token acts as a temporary key that allows
the app to request resources on your behalf. Now
that the client app has a token, it includes the
token in an API request to the resource server,
which hosts the actual data—in this case,
your Google Calendar data. Finally, the resource
server validates the access token and provides the
requested resource back to the client app. If
the token is valid and the app has the correct
permissions, it will receive the data it needs.
The key part of OAuth 2.0 is the access token
issued in step 4. It functions like the tokens we
saw in bearer authentication. It grants access to
the specified resource within the allowed scope,
for example read-only access. And just as in
bearer authentication, access tokens expire after
a short period, which helps improve security. But
instead of requiring the user to log in again
every single time the access token expires,
OAuth 2.0 uses refresh tokens, granted by the auth
server, which allow the client app to request a
new access token without user interaction. This
way, the app can maintain access over an extended
period of time without constantly requiring the
user to log in. So, that’s OAuth 2.0. It allows
third-party apps to securely access a user’s
data without exposing their credentials, and
while allowing users to control what information
is shared. That’s why OAuth 2.0 is so widely used
in modern web applications. By the way, OAuth
2.0 is defined in RFC 6749, which you can access
from this link here, or just google search for
RFC 6749. Diving into RFCs isn’t expected for
the CCNA exam, but if you’re curious to learn
more about OAuth 2.0, it’s worth checking out.
Alright, let’s wrap things up with a quick summary
of what we covered in this video before we move on
to the quiz. REST API authentication ensures that
only authorized users or systems can access an
API. Without it, anyone could send API requests,
potentially exposing or modifying sensitive data.
We looked at four types of REST API authentication
methods. Basic Authentication uses a username and
password encoded in Base64, but it’s not
encrypted, so it must be used with HTTPS
for security. Actually, that statement really
applies to all of these authentication methods:
in the modern internet, you should always use
HTTPS, not regular HTTP. Bearer Authentication
is a step up in security, using a token
issued by an authorization server instead
of sending a username and password in every
request. Tokens expire after a short time,
which increases security, but they can still
be stolen if not protected with HTTPS. Next,
API Key Authentication works similarly but uses a
static key issued by the API provider. It’s good
for tracking API usage, so it’s commonly used by
cloud service providers and third-party APIs. It’s
easier to implement than bearer authentication,
but it’s considered less secure because stolen
keys remain valid until manually revoked.
They don’t automatically expire. Finally,
OAuth 2.0 is a framework for access delegation,
allowing third-party applications limited access
to a user’s resources without sharing login
credentials. It relies on access tokens that
can be refreshed with a refresh token,
allowing continued access without user
reauthentication. OAuth 2.0 involves four
key parties: the resource owner, for example,
the owner of the Google account. The client
app, the app that requests access to the
account’s resources. The authorization server,
which grants the client app a token to provide
limited access to the requested resource. And
finally, the resource server; the server that
hosts the protected resource: for example, the
Google account’s information. Okay, that’s what
we covered in the video. Now let’s move on
to a quick quiz to test your understanding.
Here’s quiz question 1. Which of the following
REST authentication methods involve an Auth
server issuing tokens? Select two. Pause
the video now to think about your answers.
Okay, the answers are A and B, OAuth 2.0 and
bearer authentication. Here’s the diagram I
showed for OAuth 2.0, and here’s the diagram
for bearer authentication. Basic authentication
doesn’t involve an auth server; it just uses
simple username and password authentication. And
neither does API key authentication, which uses a
static key. Okay, let’s go to the next question.
Here’s question 2. Which of the
following best describes how
OAuth 2.0 improves security? Pause the
video now to think about your answer.
Okay, the answer is B, it allows third-party
apps to access resources without exposing
user credentials. Here’s the diagram once again.
Instead of using the resource owner’s credentials
for authentication, the client app receives an
access token from the auth server in step 4,
which allows it to authenticate
with the resource server in step 5,
and then access the resource. Okay,
let’s go to the next question.
Here’s question 3. Which of the
following statements are true?
Select three. Pause the video
now to think about your answers.
Okay, the answers are B, C, and E. B is
correct because bearer authentication
does require a token; the term “bearer” refers to
this bearer token. C is correct because OAuth 2.0
enables access delegation, as we covered in the
previous quiz question. And E is correct because,
instead of requiring user reauthentication
every time the access token expires,
a refresh token can be used to automatically
obtain a new access token. A is incorrect
because API keys do not expire automatically;
for this reason, they are considered less
secure than tokens. D is incorrect because basic
authentication doesn’t use encryption. Instead,
the username and password are encoded in
Base64 format, which is easily reversible.
Finally, F is incorrect because API keys should
not be included in URLs. Instead, they should be
included in the HTTP Authorization header, as this
is more secure. Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
And that’s all for this video on REST API
authentication. We covered four kinds:
basic authentication, bearer authentication,
API key authentication, and OAuth 2.0. There
are other REST authentication methods out
there, but these are the four I recommend
knowing for the CCNA exam. I hope you found
this video helpful. Thanks for watching.